add perf metric documentation (#920)
openshift/cluster-etcd-operator: docs/performance-metrics.md

> # OpenShift ETCD Performance Metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# OpenShift etcd Performance Metrics
```

> We often get complaints about ETCD performance being bad, this document should help track down the culprit and mitigate the issue at hand using Prometheus Metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document is intended to help users mitigate performance issues using Prometheus Metrics.
```

## Common Bottlenecks

### Memory

> ETCD uses bbolt, which stores everything as a single memory mapped file. In OpenShift this is up to 8 GiB big, this file is organized with a B+Tree and chunked into discrete 4k pages which can be flagged in-use or not. On top of that, several in-memory caches/indices on both ETCD and API server are being used to facilitate fast multi-version access and label/field selection respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
etcd uses bbolt, which stores everything as a single memory mapped file. In OpenShift this is up to 8 GiB big, this file is organized with a B+Tree and chunked into discrete 4k pages which can be flagged in-use or not. On top of that, several in-memory caches/indices on both ETCD and API server are being used to facilitate fast multi-version access and label/field selection respectively.
```
etcd is all lowercase (comment holds throughout doc)

Author: done, thanks :)

Due to the indices and caches employed, it is fairly easy to exhaust memory on the control plane even though the actual used size of the etcd database file is tiny. One particular scenario where is this common is when listing all pods in a large cluster or listing many large configmaps/secrets.

Check these metrics:

> process_resident_memory_bytes{job="etcd"}
> 
> process_resident_memory_bytes{job="apiserver"}

It is perfectly normal for etcd to use a multiple of its "in use DB size" as resident memory.

Try to look through the audit log and find service accounts that might be listing pods or configmaps across namespaces.
Another frequent offender are events from chatty operators, which can be found in the audit log or directly from [etcd using KCS6970015](https://access.redhat.com/solutions/6970015).

#### Defrag and Compaction

One way to reduce memory usage is to defrag bbolt and compact the database to the latest revision. It is important to run the defrag after the compaction, so one would execute:

> etctctl compact $(etctctl get / -w json | jq .header.revision)
> 
> etctctl defrag

> In more recent OpenShift versions this is done automatically -  compacting from the API server and defrag from the etcd-operator.

Reviewer: Is there a specific release you can ref here ie "in OpenShift 4.7+ this is done automatically"

Reviewer 2: That would be Openshift 4.9+ I believe
https://github.com/openshift/cluster-etcd-operator/tree/release-4.9/pkg/operator/defragcontroller

Author: yep

Sometimes etcd is quite reluctant to free memory, due to the laziness of the Golang GC. So it is perfectly normal for the resident memory to stay up until memory pressure forces it to go down again.

> 

Reviewer 2: Also interesting to see the automatic defrag operation in action if you just plugin `etcd_mvcc_db_total_size_in_use_in_bytes` and see the sawtooth for the periodic defrag.

<img width="1611" alt="Screen Shot 2022-08-30 at 3 35 35 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6660644/187555537-90f749ed-1d90-4ac4-9256-898fe0cdb6af.png">

Although it's probably easier to just look at the logs to see if the defrag call is succeeding rather than trying to infer it from this metric so not super useful.

Author: yep, I think the issue is that this exact graph is shown in the console metric dashboard for etcd. I guess lots of users freak out over this not reducing immediately.

I'll add a quick statement around checking the operator logs.

### CPU

> While ETCD is not very heavy user of CPU in general, similar to memory, ETCD is competing for CPU usage with other components on the same hosts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While etcd is not a very heavy user of CPU in general, similar to memory, etcd is competing for CPU usage with other components on the same hosts.
```

This query will give you our most offending candidates (API server, OVN and ETCD) in a single chart. 

> sum(node_namespace_pod_container:container_cpu_usage_seconds_total:sum_irate{namespace=~"openshift-etcd|openshift-ovn-kubernetes|openshift-apiserver"}) by (namespace)

Especially when dealing with OVN, you might want to drill deeper into what component is using the CPU:

> rate(container_cpu_usage_seconds_total{namespace=~"openshift-etcd|openshift-ovn-kubernetes", container=~"etcd|ovnkube-master|nbdb|northd|sbdb"}[2m])

Keep in mind that this is not exhaustive, there might be something else that runs on the host that consumes lots of CPU and thus starves etcd. It also makes sense to look at the whole picture with:

> sum(node_namespace_pod_container:container_cpu_usage_seconds_total:sum_irate{cluster="", node=~"!!! NODE NAME !!!"}) by (pod)
 

> ### Disk Latency

Reviewer 2: @tjungblu Have you ever had any experience with looking ata node's IOwait % metric?

I have this monstrosity saved from when I saw Sam using it long ago to see if some leader elections that we were seeing were correlated with IOwait spikes which indicated disk throttling.

```
(sum(irate(node_cpu_seconds_total {mode="iowait"} [2m])) without (cpu)) / count(node_cpu_seconds_total) without (cpu) * 100
AND on (instance) label_replace( kube_node_role{role="master"}, "instance", "$1", "node", "(.+)" )
```
Also in the KCS article here: https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5489721 which mentions it should be below 4%.

Again not sure how useful that is since being throttled in IOPS or a slow disk would likely manifest itself in the other metrics below as well. Just thought I'd mention it in case it seems relevant.

Author: ohh this is amazing. I was actually looking for that the other day, will add this in here too.

ETCD is extremely sensitive to high latency disk latency. ETCD utilizes the disk to persist bbolt's memory mapped file, but more importantly, for writing to the write-ahead-log (WAL). The latter is the most important path with writing and executes fsync to ensure the data is durably synchronized to the disk.

From ETCD, you can look at the 99th percentile of the WAL append with:

> histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(etcd_disk_wal_fsync_duration_seconds_bucket{job="etcd"}[5m])) by (instance, le))

To ensure the best performance, this metric should not exceed 10ms. It's thus incredibly important to run OpenShift ETCD on SSD or better NVME drives that offer less than a 1ms.

The backend disk commit can be tracked on 99th percentile with: 

> > histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(etcd_disk_backend_commit_duration_seconds_bucket{job="etcd"}[5m])) by (instance, le))

Reviewer 2: My PromQL-fu is severely lacking 😢  so this might be a stupid question but is this the same as other variants I've seen documented elsewhere:

- The [upstream alert query](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-etcd-operator/blob/33fdaf64825c13f578254107f7e7f0d503c724c9/jsonnet/vendor/github.com/etcd-io/etcd/contrib/mixin/mixin.libsonnet#L201) just uses rate and does not sum.
  - `histogram_quantile(0.99, rate(etcd_disk_backend_commit_duration_seconds_bucket{}[5m]))`
- KCS article uses irate: https://access.redhat.com/solutions/5489721
  - `histogram_quantile(0.99, irate(etcd_disk_backend_commit_duration_seconds_bucket[5m]))`
  
Although I have this exact query documented somewhere in my notes from when I saw Sam using it so I'm fairly certain this is what we've always used.

Author: great collection :+1: 

irate handles counter resets properly, so I'll use that instead - thanks!
sum is indeed not needed in our case, not sure why I added it in here... also fixed

> rate(node_disk_write_time_seconds_total{instance=~".+-master-.+"}[5m]) / rate(node_disk_writes_completed_total{instance=~".+-master-.+"}[5m])

That should reveal whether ETCD is behaving worse or better than what else is running on that host.

### Disk Bandwidth

A common reason for latency to go up is that bandwidth on the disk is exhausted. 

> sum by (namespace, node) (rate(container_fs_writes_bytes_total{namespace=~"(openshift-etcd|openshift-ovn-kubernetes)", node=~".+-master-.+"}[2m]))

On OpenShift this can vary a lot depending on how many and what operators are installed, a rule of thumb is 5-10mb/s for a 100 node cluster.

### Network Latency

OpenShift ETCD communicates primarily with control plane components and via host network. To persist a single write it needs to be acknowledged by at least a second ETCD instance using the Raft consensus protocol. This also warrants to have a low latency host network between the control plane nodes.

To see the pure network latency between the nodes, you can check the round trip time with:

> histogram_quantile(0.99, sum by (instance, le) (rate(etcd_network_peer_round_trip_time_seconds_bucket{job="etcd"}[5m])))

> Couple layers up top, you can check the reliability of GRPC. Most common you would see timeouts, failures or unavailability from the GRPC exit codes of the server using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Couple layers up top, you can check the reliability of GRPC. Most commonly you would see timeouts, failures or unavailability from the GRPC exit codes of the server using:
```
